the moon is the earth's closest space
neighbor and its only natural satellite
it likely formed when a huge mars-sized
object
crashed into our planet billions of
years ago
i wasn't around then this catastrophe
turned earth into a scorching ball of
molten rock
it also pushed some material into its
orbit creating the moon
now this heavily cratered sphere moves
around our planet
this causes high and low tides around
the globe
a bit more than one-fourth the size of
earth it's the fifth
largest natural satellite in the solar
system
the moon has several phases for example
new
full or crescent moon first and last
quarter
but whatever the satellite looks like
you can always find it in the night sky
and sometimes even during the day
but imagine waking up at night and
noticing that the moon
looks somewhat different than usual it
seems brighter
and bigger it's hardly noticeable
especially when you're half asleep
you go back to bed unaware that instead
of the moon
you've just seen mercury close up this
planet
the nearest to the sun is similar to our
natural satellite
its surface is littered with craters
left by space rocks
mercury is about two-fifths the size of
our planet but it's still a bit larger
than the moon
that's why the planet would have a
greater influence on earth
nights would become brighter high tides
would become higher
and low tides what do you think lower
yep
the lunar cycle that's the time the moon
or rather mercury now
needs to go through all the phases would
become 14 hours shorter
but all in all such a replacement
wouldn't have any drastic consequences
for our planet
but then how about venus what if instead
of the familiar satellite
we swap in the third brightest natural
object after the sun and the moon
it's often called earth's sister planet
because their mass and size are nearly
the same
venus would be as large in our sky as
earth once appeared to the apollo
astronauts when they looked at it from
the moon surface
the morning star would be much brighter
than the moon
for one thing the planet reflects six
times more sunlight
plus it would occupy an area at least 16
times larger
that's why nights on earth would be as
bright as early twilight now
if you looked at venus you'd spot vague
swirling patterns
in the planet's yellowish white cloud
cover
venus wouldn't become earth satellite
the two planets would likely orbit
around their common center of mass
and this orbit would be quite eccentric
like me
but if venus moved with the same speed
as the moon has now
the two planets would crash into each
other in the nearest future
uh-oh okay let's pull another switcheroo
if mars was up there in the sky instead
of the moon you'd surely notice it
the planet's disc would look radish oops
sorry make that
reddish and it would be almost twice the
moon's size
even without a telescope you'd be able
to marvel at its unusual color and dark
spots on its surface
and even if you didn't see the red
planet you'd still
feel something unusual mars is half of
earth's size but several times larger
than the moon
replacing a smaller space body with a
much bigger one
would upset the delicate balance on our
planet
if you were unlucky to be at the seaside
when mars took the moon's place
you'd have to evacuate as soon as
possible massive waves would rise in the
oceans under martian influence
they would crash against the shoreline
like the largest tsunamis
mars would be reflecting more sunlight
than the moon nights would be lighter
terrestrial landscapes would have an
eerie red tint
and you'd be able to admire the tallest
mountain in the solar system
olympus mons through a telescope
mars isn't large enough to change the
earth's orbit dramatically
but with time the two planets would
probably begin to orbit each other
creating a binary planet system and
since mars would literally be next door
voyages to this planet would become a
reality
okay now think really big if jupiter
replaced the moon
earth as an independent planet wouldn't
exist anymore
it would instantly turn into another
moon of the largest planet in the solar
system
the only positive moment in this
transformation people would have an
awesome sky view
jupiter is dozens of times larger than
the moon a gigantic
beautifully striped sphere would cover
nearly all the horizon
if you had time to enjoy the show you'd
see yellow brown red and white clouds
floating in jupiter's atmosphere
sadly the gas giant's gravitational pull
would instantly cause severe earthquakes
volcanic eruptions
and tsunamis earth's mantle and crust
would be drawn toward jupiter
which would break the planet apart it'd
be stretched and compressed with such
force
that its surface would bulge back and
forth by more than 300 feet
unfortunately earth speed is only 10 of
the speed needed for us to stay in
jupiter's orbit
that's why our sluggish planet would
crash into the gas giant in less than a
day
well that sounds unpleasant so let's not
do that
now if saturn were to replace the moon
it would be a sight to behold
the planet is more than 35 times larger
than our satellite
it means the giant golden globe would
cover 18 degrees of the sky
and its rings would stretch even further
from horizon to horizon
hey if you like it then you should have
put a ring on it
earth would be a bit further away from
the gas giant than its own moon dion
and since saturn is way more powerful
than our planet
earth would turn into its satellite not
the other way around
unfortunately earth's rotational speed
wouldn't be enough to keep up
and we'd most likely crash into the much
larger planet within a day or two
but before burning up in saturn's
atmosphere we'd have to pass through its
magnificent rings
they're made up of pieces of comets
asteroids and shattered moons
it wouldn't be an easy feat to get
through this space debris
plus our planet would have to avoid
saturn's moons
all 53 of them but what if the fall
didn't happen and earth did turn into
saturn's 54th moon
then the gas giant's gravitational pull
would lead to massive tectonic shifts
all over our globe
they would be tearing the planet's crust
apart until there's nothing left
not good either both uranus and neptune
are ice giants
these planets are the same size larger
than earth but smaller than saturn and
jupiter
they both have icy interiors deep
atmospheres and similar color
very beautiful bluish green if either of
these planets replace the moon
the consequences would be the same so
let's flip a coin
okay it would be neptune you'd see in
the sky one day
neptune is 14 times larger than the moon
the planet would look like a bright blue
hot air balloon in the sky
not only at night but during the day too
it would appear to be 15 times larger
than the sun
if everything else remained the same a
solar eclipse would seem to continue for
ages
once the sun vanished behind neptune's
edge our planet would be plunged into
complete darkness
for no less than an hour and a half
neptune is 17 times the mass of earth
and its gravitational pull is much
stronger
that's why our planet would end up as a
satellite
yep again it would orbit neptune
slightly further than its own largest
moon triton
by the way there would be a great risk
of earth colliding with this
space body but let's assume we were
lucky enough
not to cross path with neptune
satellites even so
there would be more than enough problems
on our hands
tides on our planet would become a
thousand times more powerful than those
caused by the moon
neptune's gravitational force wouldn't
pull earth apart
but it would heat our planet up the
seismic activity would increase
setting off earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions
use your imagination to draw two
parallel horizontal lines
now connect these lines at any point you
want in two different ways
with a vertical line that goes straight
from the bottom line to the top one
and with a diagonal line which line is
shorter
of course the vertical one it's the
shortest route to connect the top and
bottom lines with each other
and that's also the most basic answer to
our question
it's faster and easier to get into orbit
by just going straight up from the
ground
the bottom line is the earth's surface
our planet is a complex hodgepodge of
all kinds of matter
which is combined into an impressive
mass almost six
sextillion tons this likes six thousand
billions of billions
lots of zeros there just like my middle
school math scores
all that math basically works like a
colossal magnet
that besides other significant feats
allows the earth to maintain
one thing we all know and love the
atmosphere
the top line is the limit of the earth's
atmosphere anything beyond that
is the planetary orbit and outer space
but the atmosphere itself
is also filled with matter it's a
combination of gas that has its own
density
when a shuttle is launched all the mass
of this gas was constantly pushing on it
which caused friction effectively
slowing it down
going through a vacuum is like cutting
through the air whereas getting through
the atmosphere is like going through
jelly grape or strawberry
it took a lot of energy and force to get
through it while being pulled back by
that giant gravitational magnet called
earth airplanes don't struggle this much
with getting through the atmosphere
because they use its density to lift up
from the ground and maintain altitude
two things help them with that the
thrust of their engines
and the form of their wings the wings of
an airplane force the air in front of
them to split
into two streams naturally these streams
want to reunite behind the wing
but the shape of it makes the upper
stream go faster
the faster the air goes the less dense
it becomes and that means that the
airstream that goes
underneath the wing is denser than the
upper one
this creates a gradual lift for the
airplane
basically wings make it so that the
airplane can glide on the air
but of course that wouldn't be possible
without a huge force
pushing the airplane along this is what
thrust is for
just to take off from the ground an
airplane needs to attain a huge speed
the speed varies enormously between
different kinds of airplanes
60 miles an hour for light planes and
about 150 miles per hour for airliners
and just to take off and climb to 10 000
feet
the boeing 747 needs a little less than
three
tons of fuel
that may sound impressive but let's look
at that space shuttle
the first obvious things are the cute
tiny stubby wings that wouldn't be of
any
use for a horizontal takeoff but if one
was built with more excessive wings
they wouldn't be of any use in the
vacuum of space
it would also be hard to make them
sturdy enough to make it through the
launching process
the little wings of a space shuttle
served only one purpose
to land the shuttle safely so it could
be reused in future missions
they were just big enough to prevent the
shuttle from spinning uncontrollably
during the descent through the
atmosphere
and to glide it to the ground it didn't
utilize any engine operations during
landing at all
the engines of the space shuttle were
nothing like the engines of a plane
the airplane's engines needed air from
the atmosphere to work
the shuttle's engines obviously didn't
since atmospheric air would have been
hard to find in space
instead the shuttle used rocket engines
to show what rocket means here and how
these engines work
just blow up a balloon and release it
from your hand it'll fly around until
there's no air left inside
all the while being pushed in the
opposite direction as the air coming out
to fly up a rocket engine has to throw
off enough thrust
and burn the right amount of fuel to do
the job in fact
space shuttles needed so much fuel
during their ascent
to make enough thrust that they couldn't
do it on its three engines alone
they needed two additional solid rocket
boosters and a huge separate fuel tank
that was
jettisoned at the final stage of the
launch and
a shuttle would only go into orbit if it
had enough power
the power of a shuttle with three
engines and two boosters
is around 7.8 million pounds of thrust
to power up this much push an external
tank held around 1.6 million pounds of
rocket fuel
and to keep the flight under control
those three engines had to be
mind-numbingly complicated in structure
but would it be even possible to fly a
shuttle into orbit
if it was modified to use the atmosphere
like planes
well unfortunately the answer is no it
would take even more fuel to maintain
the needed speed for the distance of a
diagonal launching trajectory
the thing is even if a plane climbs to
the upper part of the atmosphere
the earth still won't let it get away to
escape the atmosphere
any object that starts from the earth
would have to be fast enough to cross
the point of so-called escape velocity
this velocity is needed to overpower the
gravitational pull of the planet
and let an object go into orbit for our
planet
this orbital speed is 17 500 miles per
hour
it's obviously way faster than the speed
of sound
and many many times faster than the
cruising speed of an airliner
now try to imagine an aircraft that goes
this fast
and how much fuel it would require on
top of that
it'd have to be sturdy enough to keep
itself in one piece while doing so
the cost and complicated technology
would just be unrealistic
the possibility that shuttles have
become a thing of the past has caused
scientists and
engineers alike to try to find even
better solutions for getting into orbit
and beyond
one such idea proposes that in the
future
people would be able to go to space on a
huge space
elevator a space elevator is the concept
of a huge
tower that connects to a satellite at
the top
which moves in line with the rotational
movement of the earth itself
the tower is supposed to be about 22 000
miles high
and made of extremely durable material
carbon nanotubes
the platform inside the tower is planned
to be set in motion
via electromagnetic powered vehicles the
trip from earth to the satellite
would take just five hours this
megastructure would allow for a cheaper
and safer way of getting into space
but carbon nanotubes were proved not
sturdy enough for building a tower this
huge
so the search for an ideal material
continues
another project that uses a similar
approach is called a space tram
the structure needed to launch this
project isn't as big
but still quite impressive it's a
vertical
vacuum tunnel that pushes a magnetically
levitated shuttle
it won't be slowed down by the air and
it'll be pushed and accelerated with an
electromagnetic force through the tunnel
it'll then shoot into the skies at a
speed close to escape velocity
the shuttle powered by this tunnel will
weigh less because
it won't need to carry a lot of fuel no
word yet on how
human beings would survive such
acceleration
riders might look like pancakes upon
arrival
if these ideas sound strange to you and
they do
then get ready for the last one it's
possible that people will use planes as
a way of getting into orbit
no i didn't lie to you previously the
plane won't go into space by itself
instead it'll be used as a launch
platform even better huh
for this purpose a special aircraft will
be made with an almost
400 foot wingspan and capable of
climbing to an
altitude of 35 000 feet small shuttles
launched from this aircraft
won't have to go through so much of the
thick atmosphere
making it easier for them to get out
from the gravitational pull of the earth
richard branson is working on this
technique right now with this virgin
galactic program
to take tourists to the edge of space
why is there so much light on earth but
almost none
once you leave our planet you might
think
it's light during the day and dark at
night because the earth spins on its
axis
and the sun illuminates either
hemisphere well that's part of the
reason
but it's more complicated than that i
mean our star
shines on the moon too but the sky above
it is always black
it comes down to the unique atmosphere
surrounding our earth
it's full of dust dirt gases and water
droplets
which all act like tiny mirrors and
reflect the sunlight
when sunlight bumps into these small
particles it diffuses and creates
different colors
that's why we see a blue sky and all
those spectacular shades during sunrise
and sunset
it's a whole different story elsewhere
if you find yourself on the moon
where there's no atmosphere the sky will
be black
you'll be able to see stars even when
the sun is blazing on the surface during
the lunar day
the same is true of space it's filled
with lots of different gases
but it has no atmosphere with molecules
to reflect sunlight
in other words space is empty
that's why even when the sun is shining
space looks like a black void
if one day the earth's atmosphere
disappeared it'd be just as dark as it
is in space or
on the moon that one's clear
but the sun isn't the only star or
source of light in the universe
so why don't other stars shine with
blazing light at night
well you're not the first one to wonder
about that
an astronomer named thomas diggs
researched this question back in the
16th century
diggs was sure that the universe had no
end and the stars in it could not be
counted
he tried to answer why all these
innumerable stars don't blind us with
glaring light
but failed his questions were just way
far ahead of his time
and he didn't have the tools to find the
answer
in the early 19th century german
astronomer
wilhelm obers suggested that the reason
the sky is dark at night
was a dusty veil that hid most of the
stars from us
this idea also proved to be wrong later
the stars shed not only light
but huge energy that could heat dust
particles so that they would start
shining themselves in that case the
night sky would still be light
because of shining dust and yet the sky
gets dark
every evening after sunset what's bad
about this theory then
diggs olbers and other astronomers of
the past
believe the universe was infinite but
modern astronomy knows better
the number of stars as countless as they
may seem
is simply not enough to illuminate the
sky at night
the sky gets dark because the stars just
as the universe itself
don't last forever they are finite
you see the universe has its own borders
and isn't as ancient as scientists used
to think sure
just shy of 14 billion years is no
whippersnapper to us humans
but is still surprisingly young in
cosmic terms
and it's not much for all of the light
from the most distant stars to be able
to reach the earth
in other words thanks to our fancy
powerful telescopes
we now know that it takes light billions
of years to get to us from the farthest
stars
this means when we look at the sky we
glance
into a very distant past modern
telescopes can show us
that the light started its journey to
the earth about 10 billion years ago
the more powerful telescopes get the
further back in time we can see
one day we'll be able to see something
that existed before stars appeared
probably by studying the dark gaps
between them
but more on that here in a sack okay
stars don't illuminate our night sky all
that much because they're really old
even as we look up at them and they're
unimaginably far away
if that's the case then why don't less
distant stars
shine as bright as the sun there should
be thousands of stars much closer than
those on the outskirts of the universe
yeah sure there are plenty let's take a
look at our closest space neighbor
proxima centauri as an example it's
practically in our backyard
just over four light years away from us
but we can't even see it in the sky
without a telescope
the thing is it's seven times smaller
than our sun
and it gives off only a fraction of one
percent of the sun's brightness
and our close neighbor just four light
years down the road
is still pretty far away about 25
trillion miles for comparison our own
big bright sun is a mere
93 million miles from earth so our star
is much bigger and closer
other stars might be brighter than the
sun but they're much farther from us too
but don't all those distant stars give
at least some noticeable light on this
planet
well i'll put it this way it'd be like
switching on a ton
of tiny halogen light bulbs they're not
as bright as one big led bulb
but they do give off part of its light
so yeah
they give us a little bit of something
but it's barely noticeable
remember space might be empty compared
to the earth's atmosphere
but there are a lot of gases out there
they move around
form clouds and serve as a sort of veil
hiding most of the light in the milky
way that's why we can't see everything
that's going on in our galaxy
we need special equipment for that but
it turns out
ulbers was sort of right only the
curtain that covers the light
is made of gas and not dust where the
big bang
comes into play the theory states that
the universe was born in a big bang
13.8 billion years ago since that time
everything has been moving away from the
point where it all began
that is the universe is expanding and
objects within it are getting farther
from each other with time
sources of light also move away and
spread out which means space
is getting darker and the number of
black areas is growing
they move at their own speed for
billions of years and our telescopes and
satellites
fancy as they may be can't notice or
track this movement